So there you go.
So that is the running
time of Bubble sort.
And I'm very thankful that a third grader,
who makes me feel stupid,
actually was able to solve this for
me cuz now I have the value right here.
And of course, you know what we can do?
We can implement this.
And I think we should implement
it because it's so dang simple.
And it'll also be your first sorting
algorithm which anyone doing an algorithms
class has to at least implement
one sorting algorithm.
So I do expect everyone to open up
their editor immediately, okay?
You don't have to, I mean,
you don't have to.
But let's look up the bubble sort,
up and up bubble sort and
it comes with an array and of course,
a sort in place algorithm.
So hopefully everyone can do this,
follow along.
So again remember our algorithm.
We need to be able to translate
the ideas in our head into code.
So what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna create
another one of these, and let's just kinda
think about it in the abstract terms,
we have an array from 0 to N.
And we need to start at 0 and go up to,
but not including N or (N- 1),
because of course we're gonna take i and
compare it to i + 1.
So we don't wanna go off the array.
If we are using a more
traditional language and
you went off the array what happens?
Array out of bounds
exception if you're in Java?
That's I think what I had the program is,
if you're in C++, you have yourself
I don't know what happens but
things happen if you go off the array.
So we don't wanna do that,
I don't wanna be reading HTML here,
htat's the hackers language.
And so what we want to do is go up
to this, we want to go up to but
not including N- 1.
Okay, so that seems pretty easy, right?
So we're gonna go for i up to say n,
right, that's our thing.
We need to do this n times, right?
We got to keep on bringing
that number down until 0, and
that means our inner loop needs to
be the one that's actually gonna
be doing the special magic and
doing all that.
So it needs to go up to n -1 but
remember every single time we do a loop
the last item becomes sorted so
we can also minus i, does that make sense?
We keep getting progressively smaller as
we go for the 0 with case, we go up to n-
1 for the first case, we go to n- 2 for
the second case, we go to n- 3 etc.
And from that point, the only thing we
have to do is do a simple comparison,
right?
If the array i is greater than array j,
swap,
right, (i,
j) that's really all we have to do, right?
I mean,
that's the extent of the algorithm.
It's extremely simple algorithm.
There we go.
Obviously, when we write this out,
this will be a little bit bigger.
All right, so
let's just write that thing out.
We have the idea in our head.
So of course we always do, I'm positive
all the JavaScript people aren't used to
writing out four loops, raw four loops,
I think I've seen it called on Twitter.
But this is just what you
gotta do in the real world,
you gotta write these four loops.
So let's go here,
let's do an i and j loop.
Awesome, so hopefully everyone has that.
Now we neither do something
with the j loop remember.
We gotta up too but
not include also the last element at
the first iteration cuz we're gonna do
a plus 1, remember that so let's minus 1.
Then remember every single time we execute
the last element becomes the largest
element we don't need to redo that so
we're also gonna minus i.
Does that make sense?
There we go, we've now translated
this code into this code,
it's just a little bit more mechanical,
not too bad.
So if array j is greater than array
(j + 1) well, now we need to swap,
swapping always not all that
bad const temp equals array j,
whatever your first line is you just
repeat array j equals array (j + 1).
Copy that and go array j + 1 temp.
There you go.
Simple swap, right?
I should have just created
a function that anyone could use.
I don't know why didn't you just have
to write it yourself, there we go.
And now this should be effectively
Bubble sort so I jumped back here and
pxjest bubble Michael bubble 8.
That would have been so much if I should
have called the file Michael Bubble I'd
have been great, there we go.
And so now we've just written Bubblesort,
it's really not all that hard this is
an extremely simple algorithm to be able
to do, you should just be able to do
this first try for the most part.
I mean, I just did it first try so
everyone can do it first try, right?
But I mean, if you really think about it's
actually a very concrete simple algorithm.
It's probably simpler than binary search.
In all technical perspective,
binary search is significantly harder than
this array or than this sorting problem.
We did it, awesome.
Your first sorting algorithm,
how does it feel?
Is everyone pretty excited about
their first sorting algorithm?
Hello, I'm excited.
All right, there are other sorting
strategies I want to talk about but
sorting algorithms are gonna
deal with recursion and
I haven't recovered recursion yet.
And so until I cover recursion, I don't
want to go into that because I want to
make sure everybody is on the same.
And page when it comes to recursion
because the problem with recursion is
recursion of course and
you don't really understand it until you
completely understand it or feel like.
I felt completely lost and then all sudden
I felt like I understood it completely.
There's no middle ground, I felt like,
it's not less sort of understanding.
Now, it's just either get it or don't.
It's a very painful concept.
All right, any questions I've
only ever had to implement
a sorting algorithm one time,
so very very rarely.
>> Since we are comparing each element of
an array with another element of an array?
It's kind of n square but
I just didn't understand that n into
n + 1 by 2, how did we came up with.
>> Yes.
>> Come up to that.
>> So the first part of your question
was we're comparing two elements of
an array so that's n squared.
But how did I come up with that formula
and all that, I can go over one more time.
So remember so that's why I did the very
fundamental thing, when you access
an array what is the runtime of
accessing an element in the array.
Is that fixed computational cost so it's
of one right, every time we access of one.
So if we access an array twice,
it's just two constant right, so
this all constant operations,
everything in here is constant.
So this part of the operation is constant,
nothing in there is based on
input size it's all constant.
It's really just these two that cause
the squared algorithm because we're going
over the length of the array and every
time we go over it we go over some or
most of the array every single time so
we go over n.
And so now how does this thing
we can go back to this proof.
So I'll just kind of go back to
the simple version of it all?
Remember, I'll just kind of re-explain it
just because the reality is we're doing
nothing different than
summing all the values.
Cuz if you think about it, we're gonna
run n times the first time, actually
well technically the first time we run n-1
amount of iterations through the loop.
If you look at the code we're running
the very first time we were running n-1
amount of times.
The next time we run n- 2 because i
becomes 1, we subtract that off also.
The next time we run n- 3 and
we keep doing this all the way
until we get to 1, right.
So if we sum all these numbers up
the way to be able to sum this
of course is via that
formula that I showed you.
And so that's how many literal
steps we're going to take.
And so there you go, we could replace
this technically with n- 1, right,
n- 1 multiplied by n- 1, plus 1, right?
I did a bad job.
But again, yes, there's still gonna be
an n squared somewhere in there, right?
Like if you just use FOIL, you'll see
that n squares eventually, there you go.
You have it so, the actual real running
time is n squared minus n over 2 and then
break that all off because insignificant
factors all that it's still n squared.
Does that make sense?
So nothing really changes,
I just tried to keep it pretty simple.
All right, I think it's a good
time to move forward, right?
We've got one more question.
>> What's a good sorting algorithm for
immutable arrays,
I assume all allocations for
Bubbles would be deadly.
>> Well, the thing is that if
you create an immutable array,
you have to come to it with
the fundamental understanding that you
are creating an exceptionally
poor performing data structure.
Immutability is supposed to
come with the ease of use, but
it comes at the cost of space and
replicating space.
And so yes, it's big computers
are extremely fast at mem copy, but
that means you're doing
an operations over and over again.
So if you were to literally do that
the worst case scenario is that you
have a reverse sorted array and you try to
bubble up that means every single time you
did that you'd have to bubble
which means you'd have to copy n.
So it'd be somewhere in the n
cubed if not higher and
I'd have to think about that but it'd
be a very poorly performing algorithm.
I also would never use immutability and
sorting in the same sentence cuz that
just seems like it's a terrible idea for
performance.
>> You look chunk.
>> Yeah,
your computer would chunk really hard.